Although many studies have shown that species richness decreases from low to high latitudes (the Latitudinal Diversity Gradient), little is known about the relationship between latitude and phylogenetic diversity. Here we examine global latitudinal patterns of phylogenetic diversity using a dataset of 459 woody and 589 herbaceous plant communities. We analysed the relationships between community phylogenetic diversity, latitude, biogeographic realm and vegetation type. Using the most recent global megaphylogeny for seed plants and the standardised effect sizes of the phylogenetic diversity metrics ‘mean pairwise distance’ (SESmpd) and ‘mean nearest taxon distance’ (SESmntd), we found that species were more closely-related at low latitudes in woody communities. In herbaceous communities, species were more closely-related at high latitudes than at intermediate latitudes, and the strength of this effect depended on biogeographic realm and vegetation type. Possible causes of this difference are contrasting patterns of speciation and dispersal. Most woody lineages evolved in the tropics, with many gymnosperms but few angiosperms adapting to high latitudes. In contrast, the recent evolution of herbaceous lineages such as grasses in young habitat types may drive coexistence of closely-related species at high latitudes. Our results show that high species richness commonly observed at low latitudes is not associated with high phylogenetic diversity.

How do ecological and evolutionary processes affect the phylogenetic alpha and beta diversity of angiosperm tree assemblages in an evolutionarily young coastal environment? Coastal vegetation of the Brazilian Atlantic Forest Domain (restingas), spanning 20° of latitude. We calculated phylogenetic alpha and beta diversity at deep and shallow levels for angiosperm tree species in 136 circular sites of 10 km diameter (hereafter assemblages). The metrics we used for alpha diversity were the mean pairwise distance (MPD) and mean nearest taxon distance (MNTD), and mean pairwise distance separating species in two assemblages (Dpw) and mean nearest taxon distance separating species in two assemblages (Dnn) for beta diversity. We then investigated the relationship between phylogenetic diversity, historical (Quaternary) and current climatic variables, and edaphic conditions along the latitudinal gradient.  We found that MPD increased with precipitation and latitude. MNTD increased with modern-day temperature, historical temperature instability and precipitation, and it was higher in more fertile and less saline soils. Dpw did not correlate either with geographic or environmental distances between assemblages. However, Dnn was strongly correlated with both geographic and environmental distances between assemblages. The increase in MPD with precipitation and latitude suggests the presence of old Gondwanan lineages colonising restingas from refugia at higher latitudes. The increase in MNTD with modern-day temperature, historical temperature instability, precipitation, and it being higher in more fertile and less saline soils indicates that the distance between phylogenetic closest relatives tends to increase in assemblages less affected by environmental filtering. Low Dpw suggests the presence of widespread lineages across restingas, whereas high Dnn may indicate niche conservatism and dispersal limitation of more derived lineages. Our results offer insights into how ecological and evolutionary processes act to shape current patterns of biodiversity in geologically young environments.

In Brazil’s Atlantic rainforest
region last month, cities
were flooded and watersheds
contaminated when some
50 million cubic metres of heavily
polluted water was released from
an iron-ore tailings pond. The
mining company responsible and
Brazil’s environment ministry
should act swiftly to mitigate the
human and ecological damage.
The release has deprived some
500,000 people of their water
supply. It is likely to damage the
entire ecological network through
chemical pollution, reduced
oxygen availability and high
turbidity, further threatening the
region’s status as one of the world’s
biodiversity hotspots.
Authorities will need to
collaborate with universities
on ecosystem restoration and
revitalization projects.

Species pools are the product of complex ecological and evolutionary mechanisms, operating over a range of spatial scales. Here, we focus on species absent from local sites but with the potential to establish within communities — known as dark diversity. Methods for estimating dark diversity are still being developed and need to be compared, as well as tested for the type, and amount, of reference data needed to calibrate these methods. We compared a widely accepted algorithm to estimate species pools (Beals smoothing index, based on species co-occurrence) against a novel method based on an unconstrained ordination (UNO). Following previous work, we used spatially nested sampling for target plots, with the dark diversity estimates computed from smaller plots validated against additional species present in larger plots, and a reference dataset (Czech National Phytosociological Database of >30,000 plots as global reference data). We determined which method provides the best estimate of dark diversity with an index termed the “Success Rate Index”. When using the whole reference dataset (national scale), both UNO and Beals provided comparable predictions of dark diversity that were better than null expectations based on species frequency. However, when predicting from regionally restricted spatial scales, UNO performed significantly better than Beals. UNO also tended to detect less common species better than Beals. The success rate of combining UNO and Beals slightly outperformed the results obtained from the single methods, but only with the largest reference dataset. The UNO method provides a consistently reliable estimate of dark diversity, particularly when the reference dataset is size-limited. For future calculations, we urge caution regarding the choice of dark diversity methods with respect to the reference data available, and how different methods handle species of high, and low, occurrence frequency.

Predicting the trajectory of ongoing diversity loss requires knowledge of historical development of community assemblages. Long-term data from palaeoecological investigations combined with key biodiversity measures in ecology such as taxonomic richness, functional diversity (FD), phylogenetic diversity (PD) and environmental factors expressed as Ellenberg indicator values (EIVs) could provide that knowledge. We explored the modern pollen–plant (moss polster pollen vs. surrounding vegetation) diversity relationships for herbaceous and woody taxa in calcareous fens from two different regions in Estonia, NE Europe. Associations of taxonomic richness, vegetation composition, FD (including functional alpha diversity and trait composition), PD and EIVs in modern pollen vs. plant data were studied with correlation analysis, Procrustes analysis and linear regression models. To test their potential use in palaeoreconstructions, diversity measures were applied on pollen data from Kanna spring fen reflecting fen vegetation development over the last nine millennia and diversity changes through time were studied using generalized additive models. Results showed significant pollen–plant richness correlations for herbaceous taxa at vegetation estimate scales up to 6 m radius and Procrustes analysis showed significant compositional associations at all plant estimate scales (up to 100 m). Woody taxa had no significant pollen–plant richness correlations but composition relationships were significant at plant estimate scales of 6–100 m. Traits that were best reflected by pollen data (both in terms of trait composition and functional alpha diversity) among woody and herbaceous taxa were seed number, clonality, SLA and LDMC. PD of herbaceous species was reflected by pollen data. Among the EIVs, Ellenberg L and T were significantly reflected by pollen data for both woody and herbaceous communities. Palaeoreconstruction from Kanna fen indicates that trends of woody taxa are mostly related to long-term changes in climate while diversity variables of herbaceous taxa closely follow autogenic processes within the fen. We suggest that pollen-based diversity estimates should be calculated separately for woody and herbaceous taxa as they clearly represent different spatial scales. Present study suggests that linking sedimentary pollen data with FD, PD and EIVs provides possibilities to examine long-term trends in community assembly and ecosystem processes that would be undetectable from traditional pollen diagrams.

Herbivory is ubiquitous. Despite being a potential driver of plant distribution and performance, herbivory remains largely undocumented. Some early attempts have been made to review, globally, how much leaf area is removed through insect feeding. Kozlov et al., in one of the most comprehensive reviews regarding global patterns of herbivory, have compiled published studies regarding foliar removal and sampled data on global herbivory levels using a standardized protocol. However, in the review by Kozlov et al., only 15 sampling sites, comprising 33 plant species, were evaluated in tropical areas around the globe. In Brazil, which ranks first in terms of plant biodiversity, with a total of 46,097 species, almost half (43%) being endemic, a single data point was sampled, covering only two plant species. In an attempt to increase knowledge regarding herbivory in tropical plant species and to provide the raw data needed to test general hypotheses related to plant–herbivore interactions across large spatial scales, we proposed a joint, collaborative network to evaluate tropical herbivory. This network allowed us to update and expand the data on insect herbivory in tropical and temperate plant species. Our data set, collected with a standardized protocol, covers 45 sampling sites from nine countries and includes leaf herbivory measurements of 57,239 leaves from 209 species of vascular plants belonging to 65 families from tropical and temperate regions. They expand previous data sets by including a total of 32 sampling sites from tropical areas around the globe, comprising 152 species, 146 of them being sampled in Brazil. For temperate areas, it includes 13 sampling sites, comprising 59 species. Thus, when compared to the most recent comprehensive review of insect herbivory (Kozlov et al.), our data set has increased the base of available data for the tropical plants more than 460% (from 33 to 152 species) and the Brazilian sampling was increased 7,300% (from 2 to 146 species). Data on precise levels of herbivory are presented for more than 57,000 leaves worldwide. There are no copyright restrictions. Please cite this paper when using the current data in publications; the authors request to be informed how the data is used in the publications.

Aridity is a critical driver of the diversity and composition of plant communities. However, how aridity influences the phylogenetic structure of functional groups (i.e. annual and perennial species) is far less understood than its effects on species richness. As perennials have to endure stressful conditions during the summer drought, as opposed to annuals that avoid it, they may be subjected to stronger environmental filtering. In contrast, annuals may be more susceptible to interannual climatic variability. Here we studied the phylogenetic structure of the annual and perennial components of understorey plant communities, along a regional aridity gradient in Mediterranean drylands. Specifically, we asked: (1) How do species richness (S) and phylogenetic structure (PS) of annuals and perennials in plant communities respond to aridity? (2) What is the contribution of other climatic and topo-edaphic variables in predicting S and PS for both components? (3) How does the taxonomic and phylogenetic turnover of annuals and perennials vary with spatial and environmental distances? We assessed annuals' and perennials' species richness, the phylogenetic structure at deep and shallow phylogenetic levels, and taxonomic and phylogenetic turnover along spatial and environmental distances. We found no relationship between annuals' richness and aridity, whereas perennials' richness showed a unimodal pattern. The phylogenetic structure of annuals and perennials showed contrasting responses to aridity and negatively correlated with topo-edaphic variables. We found phylogenetic clustering at intermediate-to-higher aridity levels for annuals, and at lower aridity levels for perennials. Both taxonomic and phylogenetic turnover in annuals and perennials correlated with the environmental distance rather than with spatial distance between communities, suggesting adaptation to local factors. Overall, our results show a decoupling in the response of the phylogenetic structure of annual and perennial components of plant communities to aridity in Mediterranean drylands. Our findings have significant implications for land management strategies under climate change.

The Atlantic Forest biodiversity hotspot is a complex mosaic of habitat types. However, the diversity of the rain forest at the core of this complex has received far more attention than that of its marginal habitats, such as cloud forest, semi-deciduous forest or restinga. Here, we investigate broad-scale angiosperm tree diversity patterns along elevation gradients in the south-east Atlantic Forest and test if the diversity of marginal habitats is shaped from the neighbouring rain forest, as commonly thought. We calculated phylogenetic indices that capture basal [mean pairwise phylogenetic distance (MPD)] and terminal [mean nearest taxon distance (MNTD)] phylogenetic variation, phylogenetic endemism (PE) and taxonomic and phylogenetic beta diversity (BD and PBD) for 2074 angiosperm tree species distributed in 108 circular sites of 10 km diameter across four habitat types i.e. rain forest, cloud forest, semi-deciduous forest and coastal vegetation known as restinga. We then related these metrics to elevation and environmental variables. Communities in wetter and colder forests show basal phylogenetic overdispersion and short phylogenetic distances towards the tips, respectively. In contrast, communities associated with water deficit and salinity show basal phylogenetic clustering and no phylogenetic structure toward the tips. Unexpectedly, rain forest shows low PE given its species richness, whereas cloud and semi-deciduous forests show unusually high PE. The BD and PBD between most habitat types are driven by the turnover of species and lineages, except for restinga. ur results contradict the idea that all marginal habitat types of the Atlantic Forest are sub-sets of the rain forest. We show that marginal habitat types have different evolutionary histories and may act as ‘equilibrium zones for biodiversity’ in the Atlantic Forest, generating new species or conserving others. Overall, our results add evolutionary insights that reinforce the urgency of encompassing all habitat types in the Atlantic Forest concept.

Dense and species-rich understory communities have been commonly found in old or abandoned stands of Eucalyptus plantations in the Cerrado domain presenting plant species and ecological niches that suggest a repository of the original biodiversity. This repository depends on the largely unknown effect of Eucalyptus plantations on their understories. We addressed this issue by testing if the effect of Eucalyptus trees on the assembly of Cerrado communities causes environmental filtering or competitive exclusion. For the test, 40 plots (20 inside stands and 20 outside) were allocated and all woody plants with a circumference at the ground level equal to or greater than 10 cm were sampled. Species richness, diversity indexes and species turnover were determined. The phylogenetic structure was evaluated at different scales using the values of Mean Pairwise Distance (MPD), the Mean Nearest Taxon Distance (MNTD), the Net Relatedness Index (NRI) and the Nearest Taxon Index (NTI), as well as phylobetadiversity indices. The metrics of alpha and beta phylogenetic diversity (NTI, MNTD, NRI and MPD, betaMPD and betaMNTD) fell within the random expectation in each plant community, suggesting a phylogenetic uniformity, but fewer plants of the Fabaceae family than expected by chance were detected outside Eucalyptus stands suggesting that this family is filtered in inside Eucalyptus stands. Species richness is lower inside than outside Eucalyptus stands. The pattern is congruent with simultaneous environmental filtering and competitive exclusion in a context of niche conservatism which means that functional traits are conserved within phylogenetic lineages.

The revegetation of steep slopes after mining and infrastructure projects is not an easy task. To enhance the effectiveness of revegetation projects, the present study aimed to review (i) specific challenges of steep slope revegetation, (ii) ecological succession patterns in similar environments, (iii) soil conditioning and revegetation strategies to enhance vegetation cover, (iv) the importance of microorganisms to enhance steep slope revegetation, and (v) the functional plant traits necessary to establish on steep slopes. In general, steep slopes are characterized by high bulk densities, potentially toxic elements, and low water and nutrient availability. Additionally, high temperature and elevated radiation constrain the soil conditioning and vegetation cover establishment. Lessons from ecological succession in natural steep slope habitats show that steep slope revegetation is a long-term process. Planting strategies, including hydroseeding and geotextiles, may enhance the implementation of vegetation cover. Different plant functional groups show adaptations necessary for establishment in steep slope environments, and mixtures of species containing different functional groups can promote diverse and resilient plant communities. Promising species may be retrieved from local rupestrian ecosystems, as these floras are adapted to shallow, oligotrophic soils. Further research on combining methods of soil conditioning with individual planting and/or seeding strategies of carefully selected species is necessary to enhance steep slope revegetation and rehabilitation, contributing to slope stability, erosion reduction, and carbon fixation in the long term.

